src/article/2019/11/2019-11-06-live-coding-secrets.md, before:

---
date: 2019-11-06
revised: 2019-11-09
title: Secrets of live coding
key: live-coding-secrets
description:
---

Live coding makes both speakers and conference organisers nervous.

I mean, who would blame them, there are so many examples of high profile live coding failures. They take a lot of careful consideration, planning and preparation - and there is _so_ much that can go wrong in execution. Everyone has been at one of those talks where the speaker flounders through a live demo, and is as relieved as the audience when it ends.

Despite all of this, or perhaps because of it, I really enjoy both delivering and watching live coding talks. Sure, there are some rough ones every now and then, but overall I find that there's a lot of value to be gained in watching and understanding how someone else goes about coding. Sure, you can show code on slides, but that isn't really _how_ you code. It is out of context, unnatural, and seldom builds a meaningful connection between the audience and what you want them to learn. So, sure there are risks, but they can be mitigated. The sense of connection to the crown, and the

> _Importantly, if you feel that live coding isn't your 'thing', that's completely ok. I'm not here to invalidate your experience, and your presentation will still be incredibly valuable. This just serves more as a record of my learnings, in trying many (many) different things while live coding._

- Examples of high profile failures
  - Surma at CDS
  - Rich Harris on Svelte at... New York somewhere?

## Why would I even?

### Coding is 'Job #1'

For almost everyone that talks about development topics, coding is "Job #1". It's literally the thing we do all day, every day. So, It shouldn't be a big surprise that not only are we good at it, we feel most comfortable while writing code. I have seen many nervous speakers settle into a talk as soon as they open an editor. It's as if you're no longer standing in front of 100's of people and rather back at your desk explaining to some curious onlookers about how you built that awesome thing.

### Suspension of disbelief

When someone shows you a snippet of code, and tells you that's all you need to be able to do something - you are well within your right to be skeptical. I've often attempted to replicate some code from presentation, and found myself disappointed that it doesn't necessarily work as advertised. On the other side, as a speaker, I've tried to fit code on a slide and wrestled with how much can be stripped away before all nuance and meaning is lost.

Live coding requires you, as a speaker, to present inherently practical examples. It has to be a thing that you can type out (one way, or another) within a time limit, and it has to illustrate the point that you're trying to make. These are hard constraints, but are very liberating in their own way. You have to pare down your implementation to the minimal viable example of of a thing that works. You have to brutally apply Occam's razor to your talk, and cut away any detail that can distract from the focus of your talk.

This means that live coding can be a very compelling way to illustrate implementation, and creates this suspension of disbelief within the audience. They have seen you do 'the thing' therefore: 1) 'the thing' is real, and 2) there is nothing stopping them from going home and doing 'the thing'. This facet alone, the ability to encourage people to go and try what you've been talking about, it immensely rewarding.

### On the other hand...

Let's be real, there is a lot that can go wrong; some of it you can control, but much of it you can't. Just because you can't control it, doesn't mean that you can't prepare for the eventuality, and turn a bad situation into an amazing talk. The rest of this article will essentially concentrate on preparation and execution.


> I would like to call out the single hardest factor to control: the audience. Many a good talk has struggled to land, purely because the wrong audience was sitting in the room. At smaller, or more specialised conferences, this may not be a concern, but at the larger developer events it is a real problem. You're likely going to speak at a an audience of wildly different backgrounds and levels of expertise, and it's something you're going to have to prepare for.

## Preparation

- Narrative
  - How will it progress.
  - How will you tell the story.
    - Sometimes it's how you implement it, sometimes its layers of complexity.
- Theme

  - Something accessible, but relevant.
  - Opportunity audience engagement, such as humor or participation.

- Build a reference application
  - End state
- Slice it up into small steps
  - Size the steps
  - Figure out timings
- Styles
  - Write it all
    - Highest risk
    - Risky and takes a long time
  - Copypasta
    - Easy.
    - Reference file and copy out snippets.
  - Git tags
    - A good idea anyway, in case something goes wrong.
  - Roll forwards / backwards
    - Script
  - Code Snippets
    - I use this the most extensively.
    - Mostly use textmate style
    - VS Code / IntelliJ family
    - Naming schemes
    - Multiple snippet points
    - Save it as a part of the project, commit into revision control.
    - https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/userdefinedsnippets
    - MORE
  - Text expansion
    - At an OS level, can work with applications that don't have snippet support.
    - Be careful of keyloggers.
- Notes
  -  Rules behind showing code still apply.
    - Max 7 lines of code per slide.
  - Find what works for you.
  - https://github.com/mikegeyser/building-pwas-with-angular

- Practice (practice, practice)

## Execution

- Visibility

  - Use a light, high-contrast editor theme
  - Most versatile in different lighting conditions
  - Set a large font size on your editor
  - Don't move quickly. Slow and purposeful.
  - Keyboard shortcuts?
    - Narrate what you're doing. Literally tell them what you're pressing.
  - Don't forget the terminal!
    - Scroll the output to the top (CMD-R or equivalent)
    - So that it's visible to the people in the back.

- Doing the thing
  - Typing and talking
    - Hardest part.
  - When (not if) things go wrong.
    - Own the problem, use it as an opportunity to engage the audience.
    - NEVER BE QUIET! Tell them what you're trying.
    - Explain what went wrong when you find and fix it. Prime learning opportunity.

  - Learn to cut and run
    - Fall back to backup plan.
    - Scott hanselmann and the extra laptop.
    - How long you struggle for will depend on the impact of that part of the talk.
    - If its really important, you should have a backup for it.

## Conclusion

Hm?

Commit message:

Added some more stuff on narrative.

src/article/2019/11/2019-11-06-live-coding-secrets.md, after:

---
date: 2019-11-06
revised: 2019-11-09
title: Secrets of live coding
key: live-coding-secrets
description:
---

Live coding makes both speakers and conference organisers nervous.

I mean, who would blame them, there are so many examples of high profile live coding failures. They take a lot of careful consideration, planning and preparation - and there is _so_ much that can go wrong in execution. Everyone has been at one of those talks where the speaker flounders through a live demo, and is as relieved as the audience when it ends.

Despite all of this, or perhaps because of it, I really enjoy both delivering and watching live coding talks. Sure, there are some rough ones every now and then, but overall I find that there's a lot of value to be gained in watching and understanding how someone else goes about coding. Sure, you can show code on slides, but that isn't really _how_ you code. It is out of context, unnatural, and seldom builds a meaningful connection between the audience and what you want them to learn. So, sure there are risks, but they can be mitigated. The sense of connection to the crown, and the

> _Importantly, if you feel that live coding isn't your 'thing', that's completely ok. I'm not here to invalidate your experience, and your presentation will still be incredibly valuable. This just serves more as a record of my learnings, in trying many (many) different things while live coding._

- Examples of high profile failures
  - Surma at CDS
  - Rich Harris on Svelte at... New York somewhere?

## Why would I even?

### Coding is 'Job #1'

For almost everyone that talks about development topics, coding is "Job #1". It's literally the thing we do all day, every day. So, It shouldn't be a big surprise that not only are we good at it, we feel most comfortable while writing code. I have seen many nervous speakers settle into a talk as soon as they open an editor. It's as if you're no longer standing in front of 100's of people and rather back at your desk explaining to some curious onlookers about how you built that awesome thing.

### Suspension of disbelief

When someone shows you a snippet of code, and tells you that's all you need to be able to do something - you are well within your right to be skeptical. I've often attempted to replicate some code from presentation, and found myself disappointed that it doesn't necessarily work as advertised. On the other side, as a speaker, I've tried to fit code on a slide and wrestled with how much can be stripped away before all nuance and meaning is lost.

Live coding requires you, as a speaker, to present inherently practical examples. It has to be a thing that you can type out (one way, or another) within a time limit, and it has to illustrate the point that you're trying to make. These are hard constraints, but are very liberating in their own way. You have to pare down your implementation to the minimal viable example of of a thing that works. You have to brutally apply Occam's razor to your talk, and cut away any detail that can distract from the focus of your talk.

This means that live coding can be a very compelling way to illustrate implementation, and creates this suspension of disbelief within the audience. They have seen you do 'the thing' therefore: 1) 'the thing' is real, and 2) there is nothing stopping them from going home and doing 'the thing'. This facet alone, the ability to encourage people to go and try what you've been talking about, it immensely rewarding.

### On the other hand...

Let's be real, there is a lot that can go wrong; some of it you can control, but much of it you can't. Just because you can't control it, doesn't mean that you can't prepare for the eventuality, and turn a bad situation into an amazing talk. The rest of this article will essentially concentrate on preparation and execution.


> I would like to call out the single hardest factor to control: the audience. Many a good talk has struggled to land, purely because the wrong audience was sitting in the room. At smaller, or more specialised conferences, this may not be a concern, but at the larger developer events it is a real problem. You're likely going to speak at a an audience of wildly different backgrounds and levels of expertise, and it's something you're going to have to prepare for.

## Preparation

### Narrative

Live coding is not just 'building a thing', nor is it showing code. Live coding in a talk is there to advance the narrative of the talk, as much as slides are, and it's important to think of it as such when preparing. In any good narrative you need to have a high-level thread through the talk, a simple-to-follow moral-of-the-story, if you will. This is so that even when your audience isn't following along, or your demo tanks spectacularly, there is a concrete conclusion that the audience can take away. Every decision that you make, in terms of what you do in your demo, needs to support this high level narrative in some way, shape or form. Your audience should never be left wondering 'what was the purpose of the talk?', even if you have to be blunt about it in your conclusion (and in fact, it is recommended).

The high level narrative acts as the [carrier frequency](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carrier_wave) for the technical content of your demo. You're going to bake the detail into each of the phases of the talk, being very careful not to break the overarching rhythym. Continuing with the wave metaphor, you need to be aware of the peaks and troughs of your talk, as well as where the [inflection points](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inflection_point) of your narrative are. You will delve into the (likely increasing) layers of complexity in short bursts, and then pause to reinforce the over arching narrative of your talk. This can be as simple as showing the effect of the changed code on the UI, and giving the audience a chance to digest the implication. While it's possible to have a big-bang reveal at the end, it is a delicate balance, because the longer you proceed without pausing, the greater the risk of losing the audience. 

- Narrative
  - How will it progress.
  - How will you tell the story.
    - Sometimes it's how you implement it, sometimes its layers of complexity.
- Theme
  - Something accessible, but relevant.
  - Opportunity audience engagement, such as humor or participation.

### Build a reference application
- Build a reference application
  - End state
- Slice it up into small steps
  - Size the steps
  - Figure out timings

## Different styles of live coding
- Styles
  - Write it all
    - Highest risk
    - Risky and takes a long time
  - Copypasta
    - Easy.
    - Reference file and copy out snippets.
  - Git tags
    - A good idea anyway, in case something goes wrong.
  - Roll forwards / backwards
    - Script
  - Code Snippets
    - I use this the most extensively.
    - Mostly use textmate style
    - VS Code / IntelliJ family
    - Naming schemes
    - Multiple snippet points
    - Save it as a part of the project, commit into revision control.
    - https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/userdefinedsnippets
    - MORE
  - Text expansion
    - At an OS level, can work with applications that don't have snippet support.
    - Be careful of keyloggers.


- Notes
  -  Rules behind showing code still apply.
    - Max 7 lines of code per slide.
  - Find what works for you.
  - https://github.com/mikegeyser/building-pwas-with-angular

- Practice (practice, practice)

## Execution

- Visibility

  - Use a light, high-contrast editor theme
  - Most versatile in different lighting conditions
  - Set a large font size on your editor
  - Don't move quickly. Slow and purposeful.
  - Keyboard shortcuts?
    - Narrate what you're doing. Literally tell them what you're pressing.
  - Don't forget the terminal!
    - Scroll the output to the top (CMD-R or equivalent)
    - So that it's visible to the people in the back.

- Doing the thing
  - Typing and talking
    - Hardest part.
  - When (not if) things go wrong.
    - Own the problem, use it as an opportunity to engage the audience.
    - NEVER BE QUIET! Tell them what you're trying.
    - Explain what went wrong when you find and fix it. Prime learning opportunity.

  - Learn to cut and run
    - Fall back to backup plan.
    - Scott hanselmann and the extra laptop.
    - How long you struggle for will depend on the impact of that part of the talk.
    - If its really important, you should have a backup for it.

## Conclusion

Hm?
