README.md, before:

# Self

This project was generated with [Angular CLI](https://github.com/angular/angular-cli) version 1.4.4.

## Development server

Run `ng serve` for a dev server. Navigate to `http://localhost:4200/`. The app will automatically reload if you change any of the source files.

## Code scaffolding

Run `ng generate component component-name` to generate a new component. You can also use `ng generate directive|pipe|service|class|guard|interface|enum|module`.

## Build

Run `ng build` to build the project. The build artifacts will be stored in the `dist/` directory. Use the `-prod` flag for a production build.

## Running unit tests

Run `ng test` to execute the unit tests via [Karma](https://karma-runner.github.io).

## Running end-to-end tests

Run `ng e2e` to execute the end-to-end tests via [Protractor](http://www.protractortest.org/).

## Further help

To get more help on the Angular CLI use `ng help` or go check out the [Angular CLI README](https://github.com/angular/angular-cli/blob/master/README.md).

Commit message:

Moved from angular to the PWA starter kit.

README.md, after:

[![Built with pwa–starter–kit](https://img.shields.io/badge/built_with-pwa–starter–kit_-blue.svg)](https://github.com/Polymer/pwa-starter-kit "Built with pwa–starter–kit")
[![Build status](https://api.travis-ci.org/Polymer/pwa-starter-kit.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/Polymer/pwa-starter-kit)

> ## 🛠 Status: In Development
> PWA Starter Kit is currently in development. It's on the fast track to a 1.0 release, so we encourage you to use it and give us your feedback, but there are things that haven't been finalized yet and you can expect some changes.
>
> See the list of Known Issues and TODOs, below, for updates.

# PWA Starter Kit

This sample app is a starting point for building PWAs. Out of the box, the template
gives you the following features:
- all the PWA goodness (manifest, service worker)
- a responsive layout
- application theming
- example of using Redux for state management
- offline UI
- simple routing solution
- fast time-to-interactive and first-paint through the PRPL pattern
- easy deployment to prpl-server or static hosting
- unit and integrating testing starting points
- documentation about other advanced patterns.

### 📖 Head over to the [documentation site](https://pwa-starter-kit.polymer-project.org/) for more details or check out [how to get started](https://pwa-starter-kit.polymer-project.org/setup/)!

![pwa-starter-kit screenshot](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1369170/39715580-a1be5126-51e2-11e8-8440-96b07be03a3c.png)

## TODOs

- [x] Setup Safari testing on Travis.
- [x] Deploy all templates as demos.
- [ ] Update to latest [Material Web Components](https://github.com/material-components/material-components-web-components).
